                        SETATR
                        ------

         SETATR will set (or un-set) the attribute bits used by
         CP/M 2.2 (and by BACKUP, its companion programme) to -

              What it does                  Mode
              ------------                  ----
              
              make a file read-only         R/O
              make a file read-write        R/W
              make a file "system"          SYS
              make a file "directory"       DIR
              archive a file                ARC  with BACKUP
              copy a file                   CPY  with BACKUP

         It is a simple-minded programme and will only do one thing
         at a time....so, no multiple commands on the command line.
         The good news is that you can use the CP/M "ambiguous file"
         feature to do whole classes of files at the one time if you
         wish.   This is particularly useful in, say, converting all
         your old "COM" files to "ARC" status before running BACKUP
         on a disk for the first time.

         e.g. if you wanted to do this, just enter -

              setatr [d:]*.com arc  <RETURN>

         where "d:" is the optional drive specification, and it will
         be done automatically.

         Note I didn't get it to check first to see whether the file
         was already set to the status you ask, as it runs quickly
         enough not to have to worry about saving a couple of seconds.
         e.g. on my system it will do 36 files in 14 seconds, so I
         figure that's good enough not to worry about speeding it up,
         if indeed that is possible to do in any event.

         Otherwise, the usage for unambiguous files is -

              setatr [d:]filename MODE  <RETURN>

         where "MODE" is any of the three-letter combinations listed
         above.   Either lower case or upper case is OK in any of the
         commands as they are all converted to upper case in the
         course of running SETATR.

         If you don't remember any of this, not to worry, just enter

              setatr  <RETURN>

         and it will prompt you for input from the console.   If you
         find any bugs you may contact me at -

                             Phil Cogar,
                             P.O. Box 364,
                             Narrabeen,
                             N.S.W.   AUSTRALIA   2101
                             -------------------------e "directory"       DIR
  