
        Copyright (c) 1987 Blue Sky Software.  All rights reserved.

#ovhelp HOW TO USE HELP IN OVERVIEW
text

  OverView uses the last two lines of your computer's screen to show you what
  topics have help information available.  The next to last line displays the
  list of topics available while the very last line displays a short message
  about one of the topics listed.

  You can select a topic for further help in one of two ways.  You can
  "point" to the topic by using the space bar, tab key, or backspace key to
  move the highlighted bar over the desired topic and press the Return key.
  As you move the highlighted bar, the last line will change to display a
  short message about the currently highlighted topic.  The other, faster
  method of selecting a help topic is to simply press the key that is the
  first letter of the topic.

  For example, to get help on OverView commands ("Cmds" on the topic line
  below) you can either press the space bar twice (to highlight "Cmds") and
  then press the Return key, or just press the C key once.

  For more information on using HELP, press the M (for More) key.

txet
menu
More More help on using Help
Menus Help on using menus
Cmds Help on OverView commands
Fkeys Help on function key usage
Keys Help on other key usage
Screen Help on OverView screen displays
unem
#more MORE HELP ON USING HELP
text

  Each help screen contains a topic named "Quit."  Selecting the Quit topic
  will exit OverView's help facility and return you to whatever you were
  doing before you asked for help.

  All help screens except the first screen contain a topic named "Prev."  If
  you select the Prev topic, you will be returned to whatever help screen was
  displayed prior to the current topic.

txet
#keys OTHER KEY SUMMARY
text

  Esc - Returns you to the top level menu of the current function.
      - Interrupts an operation (copy, rename, etc) on tagged files.
      - Aborts operation when answering prompt.

     - Moves the file or dir pointer, scrolls up in VIEW.
     - Moves the file or dir pointer, scroll down in VIEW.
  ->  - Moves the file or dir pointer, scrolls right in VIEW, moves cursor
        right when answering prompt.
  <-  - Moves the file or dir pointer, scrolls left in VIEW, moves cursor
        left when answering prompt.

  Home- Goes to first file name, moves to top of file in VIEW, moves to root
        dir in DIR.
  End - Goes to last file name, moves to bottom of file in VIEW.
  PgUp- Moves up a screen of file names, moves up a screen in VIEW.
  PgDn- Moves down a screen of file names, moves down a screen in VIEW.

  Ins - Toggles insert mode when answering prompt.
  Del - Deletes char under cursor when answering prompt.
  <-  - (backspace) Deletes char left of cursor when answering prompt.
txet
#menus USING MENUS
text

  The last two lines of the computer's screen display a menu of the commands
  and command options you can currently perform (in HELP, they display the
  help topics available).  The next to last line lists the individual
  commands or options available, while the very last line displays a short
  message about the highlighted command or option.

  You can select a command or option from the menu in one of two ways. You
  can "point" to the command or option using the space bar, tab key, or
  backspace key to move the highlighted bar over the desired topic and press
  the Return key.  As you move the highlighted bar, the last line changes to
  display a short message about the currently highlighted command.  The
  other, faster method of selecting a command or option is to simply press
  the key that is the first letter of the topic.

txet
#screen SCREEN LAYOUT
text

  OverView has four distinctly different screen displays.  They are:

  File name display - displays the names of the files in the current
  directory or drive.  Detailed information about each file will be shown if
  selected by the INFO command.  This is the normal display.

  Directory tree display - displays the directory organization of the current
  disk in a graphical, tree-like manner.  This display is selected by the DIR
  command.

  Help display - displays a screen of help information.  You are looking at
  the help display now.  This display is selected by the HELP command or the
  F1 function key.

  View display - displays the contents of a file in ascii or hexadecimal
  format.  The view display is selected by the VIEW command.

  The file name and directory tree displays share a common header that
  displays information about the current disk and directory.  For more
  information on the header, select the More option from the menu below.

txet
menu
More More information on the header format
unem
#more  HEADER FORMAT
text

  The top of the file name and directory tree screens show OverView's current
  status.  Included is information about the current disk Volume, the current
  directory Path, the Files in the current directory and Selection criteria
  used to pick the files displayed.

  The Volume section displays the current disks volume label, the size of the
  disk in bytes and the amount of free space available on the disk.

  The Path section displays the full pathname of the current directory.

  The Files section displays the number and size in bytes of the selected
  files in the current directory and the number and size of the tagged files.

  The Selection section displays the current file name mask and attribute
  settings used to selection files from the current directory.  Only files
  that match the selection criteria are displayed in the file name screen.

txet
#cmds OVERVIEW COMMAND SUMMARY
text

         HELP   - Provides on-line help on OverView usage
         COPY   - Copies the current or all tagged files
         DIR    - Display the current disk's directory tree
         ERASE  - Erases the current or all tagged files
         INFO   - Toggles the display of additional file information
         NEW    - Reread and redisplay the current directory
         RENAME - Rename (or move) the current or all tagged files
         SORT   - Sort files by name, extension, date, size, unsorted
         TAG    - Tag one or more files for other operations
         VIEW   - View the current file on your screen
         OTHER  - Display secondary menu of commands
         QUIT   - Quit to DOS
txet
menu
Dir Help on DIR commands
Info Help on Info
Sort Help on SORT commands
Tag Help on TAG commands
View Help on VIEW commands
Other Help on OTHER commands
unem
#fkeys FUNCTION KEY SUMMARY
text

         F1  - Get Help
         F2  - Tag/Untag the current file (toggles current tag state)
         F3  - Login to the parent directory
         F4  - Login to the subdirectory under the file pointer
         F5  - Goto the next tagged file
         F6  - Goto the previous tagged file
         F7  - Open another file name display window
         F8  - Close the current file name display window
         F9  - Goto the next file name display window
         F10 - Goto the previous file name display window

txet
#dir DIR COMMAND
text

  The DIR commands let you view, make, remove, and change directories. When
  DIR is selected from the main menu, the current disks directory structure
  will be displayed in a graphical tree format.

  When first displayed, the current directory will be highlighted.  You can
  move this dir pointer by using the keypad arrow keys and the home key.  As
  you move the dir pointer, the pathname displayed at the top of the screen
  will be updated.

  Moving the dir pointer does not actually change the current directory
  unless you use the Dir Login command to log in to the currently highlighted
  directory.  If you quit the dir tree display (instead of logging into a
  directory) you will be returned to same directory that was displayed before
  displaying the dir tree (regardless of where you move the dir pointer).

txet
#info INFO COMMAND
text

  The INFO command turns on and off the display of extra information for the
  files displayed.  When the extra information display is off, only the names
  of the selected files are displayed.  When the extra information display is
  on, the following information is also displayed about each selected file:
  1) the file size in bytes, 2) the amount of disk space used by the file, 3)
  the date the file was created or last modified, 4) the time the file was
  created or last modified and, 5) the file attributes.

txet
#sort SORT COMMAND
text

  The SORT commands allow you to display file names sorted by primary file
  name, by file name extension, by date, by size, or in DOS directory order
  (unsorted).  Additionally, with the sort options command, you can have the
  file names sorted in ascending or descending order.

txet
#tag TAG COMMAND
text

  The TAG commands allow you pick files to be operated on by other commands.
  For example, with TAG you can pick all the files that have been created or
  modified after a particular date and use the copy command to copy these
  files to another disk or directory.

  Tagged files have a -> displayed in front of the file name and the name is
  displayed in a different (user selectable) video attribute so that tagged
  files visually "stand out" from untagged files.

  The number of files current tagged, and the size of the tagged files is
  displayed in the Files section of the header at the top of the screen.

  The TAG CURRENT command will tag the current file.  The current file can
  also be tagged with the F2 key.

  The TAG INVERT command will flip the tag state of all displayed files.
  Tagged files become untagged, untagged files become tagged.

  The TAG RESET command untags all files.

txet
menu
More More help on TAG commands
unem
#view VIEW COMMAND
text

  The VIEW command allows you to view the contents of the current file.  VIEW
  will attempt to display as an ASCII text file.  The file can be viewed in a
  hexadecimal "dump" format by selecting the HEX subcommand.

  The VIEW 7BIT and 8BIT subcommands display the ASCII data as either 7 or 8
  bit characters.  Some word processing programs my leave the high order bit
  of some characters turned on, making the text difficult to read without the
  7 bit option.

  The VIEW TOF and EOF subcommands allow you to skip the the Top or End of
  File without viewing all the intervening data.

  VIEW allows you to set from 1 to 5 markers anywhere in the file with the
  SET subcommand.  The GOTO subcommand can be used to returned to any set
  marker location from anywhere else in the file.

  The DWN subcommand (and PgDn key) display the next screen in the file. UP
  (and PgUp) display the prior screen.  NXT (and ) move down a line.  PRV
  (and ) move up a line.  RIGHT (and ->) move right 8 columns.  LEFT (and
  <-) move left 8 columns.

txet
#more ADDITIONAL TAG COMMANDS
text

  The TAG TODAY command is a shortcut method of tagging all files that have
  been created or modified since 0:00 a.m. this morning.

  The TAG MODIFIED command will tag all files that have the DOS Archive
  attribute set.  DOS turn on this attribute whenever a file is created or
  modified.

  The TAG NAME command allows you to tag files by giving a file name.  You
  can supply a specific file name to tag an individual file, or you can enter
  a pattern to tag all matching file names.  OverView supports the standard
  DOS * and ? wildcard characters. For example, entering OV*.C will tag all
  files that start with the letters "OV" and have an extension of "C".

  The TAG DATE command allows you to tag all files created or modified
  between two dates and times.  You must specify the From and To date/times
  in MM/DD/YY HH:MM:SS A/P format.  Remember to give the time in a 12 hour
  format and specify A for a.m. or P for p.m.  Hit return to move between
  fields.

txet
#other OTHER COMMAND SUMMARY
text

         ATTRIB       - Set DOS file attributes for current or tagged files
         COMMAND      - Execute a single DOS command
         DEFINE       - Define the screen parameters
         INTERPRETER  - Spawn a copy of the DOS command interpreter
         SELECT       - Specify file selection criteria
         VOLUME       - Create or change the volume name
         WINDOW       - Open, close, or switch file name display windows
         XECUTE       - Execute the current file
txet
menu
Attrib Help on the ATTRIB command
Define Help on the DEFINE command
Select Help on the SELECT command
Window Help on the WINDOW command
unem
#attrib ATTRIB COMMAND
text

  The ATTRIB command allows you to set the DOS file attributes for the
  current or all tagged files.  There are four attributes that you can set:
  Read/Only, Hidden, System, and Archive (R H S A).  Refer to your DOS
  documentation for the meaning and usage of each attribute.

  When you select the ATTRIB command, a dialog box will appear on the screen
  showing the file name (or "TAGGED FILES" if you select ATTRIB TAGGED
  instead of ATTRIB CURRENT) and the file's current attributes (none if
  tagged selected).  The attributes are displayed as the letters R, H, S, and
  A for Read/Only, Hidden, System, and Archive, respectively.  If a
  particular attribute is not set for a file, it will be displayed as a
  period (.).

  Chose the attributes that the file(s) is (are) to have by selecting the
  corresponding menu options.  Each time an attribute menu option is
  selected, the attribute will be toggled (turned on if off, off if on). When
  the desired attributes are shown, select ENTER to actually change the
  attributes for the file(s).  QUIT will exit without changing any attributes.

txet
#define DEFINE COMMAND
text

  The DEFINE command allows you to customize OverView's screen display to
  your own preferences.  With DEFINE you can change the video attributes used
  to display various types of information.  On a color display monitor, the
  video attributes determine which colors are displayed.  On a monochrome
  monitor, the attributes select display options like underlined, inverse
  video, and intensity.

  You can specify video attributes for seven different types of displayed
  text.  They are: Normal text, Highlighted text, Window text, Highlighted
  window text, Heading text, Background text, and Tagged file name text.  The
  easiest way to determine what the different types of text are is to try
  changing the colors and observing the results.  Note that the attributes
  selected will not be made permanent unless you use the WRITE subcommand to
  write the setting to disk.

txet
menu
Colors Help on setting display "colors"
Snow Help on enabling/disabling video "snow"
Write Help on writing current video settings to disk
unem
#colors SETTING DISPLAY COLORS
text

  The DEFINE COLORS command enables you the change the display colors
  (attributes) used by OverView.  When you select the COLORS subcommand, a
  small window will pop up showing the keys to use to select the attributes.
  The PgUp and PgDn keys on the numeric keypad select the type of text to
  define, while the cursor keys select the particular display attribute for
  that type of text.  The current type of text and the current attribute are
  always indicated by  TEXT  characters.

  When you have set the attributes you like, use the SET subcommand to end
  color/attribute selection and begin using the new attributes.  Note that
  the attribute selections are not make permanent until the DEFINE WRITE
  command is used.

  If you've selected a set of attributes you don't like, you can use the QUIT
  subcommand to return to the previous attribute settings.

  By using the RESET subcommand, you can restore the default (permanent)
  settings even if you have SET other attributes.  RESET will restore the
  last settings that you made permanent with the DEFINE WRITE command.

txet
#snow ENABLING/DISABLING VIDEO SNOW
text

  The DEFINE SNOW command allows for faster screen updates on those systems
  that do not make "snow" when writing directly to video memory.  This
  command is only useful for systems with color display adapters - monochrome
  adapters do not make "snow" and OverView knows not to check for snow when
  using a monochrome adapter.

  Disabling "snow" checking will significantly speed up screen updates.  If
  you are not sure if your color display adapter makes snow or not, try
  disabling OverView's snow checking.  It will be immediately obvious if you
  need to re-enable the snow checking.

txet
#write WRITING VIDEO SETTINGS TO DISK
text

  Color/attribute settings and video "snow" checking selection are not make
  permanent until you use the DEFINE WRITE command to actually write the
  settings to disk.  This command will actually modify the OV.EXE program on
  disk so the next time you run OverView, the new settings will be the
  defaults.

  Note that OverView will first look for the OV.EXE file in the current
  directory.  If its not there, the directories identified in the DOS PATH
  command (if any) will be searched.  If OV.EXE can't be found in any of
  these directories, you will be prompted for the location of the file to be
  updated.

txet
#select SELECT COMMAND
text

  The SELECT command allows you to specify a set of criteria to limit the
  file names displayed by OverView.  In addition, the SELECT SHOWALL command
  displays all the files on the disk as if they were in the same directory.

  With a selection mask you can display only the files that match a specific
  file name pattern.  For example, a selection mask of *.C will display on
  files that have an extension of .C.  You can also invert a selection mask
  to display only those files that do not match a specific pattern.  The file
  name selection mask is set, cleared, and inverted by the SELECT MASK SET,
  SELECT MASK CLEAR, SELECT MASK INVERT commands, respectively.  The current
  file selection mask is displayed in the Selection area of the header at the
  top of the screen.  By default, there is no selection mask, allowing all
  files to be displayed.

  With the SELECT ATTRIB command you can specify a set of DOS file attributes
  to select which files wil be displayed.  A file with a given attribute will
  only be displayed if that attribute is enabled.  The list of selection
  attributes is displayed in the Selection area of the header at the top of
  the screen.  By default, all attributes are enabled, allowing all files to
  be displyed.

txet
menu
More More help on the Select command
unem
#more MORE HELP ON SELECT
text

  The SELECT SHOWALL command displays all files on the current disk.  Note
  that you can use this command in conjunction with the selection mask and/or
  selection attributes to limit the files displayed.  For example, a
  selection mask of *.EXE combined with SELECT SHOWALL will display all .EXE
  files on the current disk.

  The SELECT TAGGED command selects all the tagged files currently displayed.
  All non-tagged files are removed from the display.

  The SELECT RESET command restores the file selection mask and selection
  attributes to their default condition.  Note that SELECT RESET does not
  turn off SELECT SHOWALL.

txet
#window WINDOW COMMAND
text

  The WINDOW command allows you to work with additional file name display
  windows.  OverView can have up to four windows active at any one time -
  there is always at least one window active.  Each file name display window
  can access a different drive and directory, or all the windows can access
  the same directory.

  Only one of the displayed windows will contain the highlighted file pointer
  at any given time;  this is called the current window.  The name of the
  directory shown in the current window is displayed in the header at the top
  of the screen.  Commands that operate on files will only work on the files
  in the current directory.  For example, the ERASE TAGGED command will erase
  all tagged files in the directory shown by the curre